gh-132604: Deprecate inherited runtime checkability of protocols (#143806)
python/cpython: Misc/NEWS.d/next/Library/2026-01-13-15-56-03.gh-issue-132604.lvjNTr.rst

> Previously, :class:`~typing.Protocol` classes that were not decorated with :deco:`~typing.runtime_checkable`,
> but that inherit from another ``Protocol`` class that does have this decorator, could be used in :func:`isinstance`
> and :func:`issubclass` checks. This behavior is now deprecated and such checks will throw a :exc:`TypeError`
> in Python 3.20. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.

Author: Tenses

```suggestion
Previously, :class:`~typing.Protocol` classes that were not decorated with :deco:`~typing.runtime_checkable`,
but that inherited from another ``Protocol`` class that did have this decorator, could be used in :func:`isinstance`
and :func:`issubclass` checks. This behavior is now deprecated and such checks will throw a :exc:`TypeError`
in Python 3.20. Patch by Bartosz Sławecki.
```

> It is deprecated to call :func:`isinstance` and :func:`issubclass` checks on

Reviewer: I would reword as "Previously, Protocol classes that were not decorated with `@runtime_checkable`, but that inherit from another Protocol class that does have this decorator, could be used in `isinstance` and `issubclass` checks. This behavior is now deprecated and such checks will throw a TypeError in Python 3.20."
